# Brainstorming Discussion on 2019-06-10


## Considerations

The subsections below outline some of the elements that could be combined to define research problems and studies.


### Graph metrics

We can compute standard local or global metrics on graphs: see <http://www.di3.drexel.edu/DI3/Events/SAMCO03/6C%20Los%20Alamos%20Infra%20Simulation.pdf#page=47> for examples.

We can compute standard motifs, or variations of these that include labelling, time, etc.

Note that there is more than one way to represent a power system as a graph. In particular, the attributes of nodes can often be transformed into edges in an augmented graph. Perhaps the most compact way to consider the power-system physics as a graph is as follows:

*   Vertex attributes:
    *   Maximum and actual power generation
    *   Customer demand, actual customer load served, and load shed
*   Edge attributes
    *   Capacity (i.e., maximum flow)
    *   Actual flow


### Power-system simulations

The SIIP power simulations can be run statically (i.e., at a single time of day/year) or dynamically (i.e., every five minutes or hour for a time interval).

The primary input parameters describing the power-system network are:

*   Network topology
    *   Location of buses
    *   Location of branches (i.e., lines)
    *   Location of generation
    *   Location of customer loads
*   Branches
    *   Maximum flow
*   Generation
    *   Technology (gas turbine, coal, nuclear, wind, PV, etc.)
    *   Maximum power, as a function of time
*   Loads
    *   Customer demand (i.e., desired load), as a function of time

The primary output results describing the power-system operations are:

*   Buses
    *   Voltage magnitude
    *   Voltage angle
*   Branches
    *   Real power flow
    *   Reactive power flow
*   Generation
    *   Real power
    *   Reactive power
*   Loads
    *   Load served
    *   Load shed (i.e., customer demand minus load served)

The simplest global measure of system distress is simply the total load shed as a fraction of total customer demand. The simplest local measure is the fraction of load shed on a per-bus basis.


### Time dependence


#### Power-system variability

Customer demand varies with time, as does the power production from renewable generation (wind, PV, etc.).


#### Degradation/restoration of networks

The network can be treated as a multilayered graph that evolves in time, due either to random failures or to targeted attacks.  Each degradation yields a new layer.

Similarly, restoration undoes previous degradation.  Restoration may target the most critical components, proceed somewhat randomly, etc.

Degradation and restoration could proceed simultaneously or be interleaved. They can occur when other aspects of the network (demand and generation) are also changing.


### Level sets and topological data analysis

There are several aspects of the power system where Morse theory and TDA can be applied:

*   The timeseries for flows, generation, load, and/or voltage. *There doesn't seem to be literature applying TDA to timeseries living on a graph's vertices and/or edges.*
*   The graph as a static entity with attributes/weights on vertices/edges.
*   The connectivity of the graph itself (i.e., without consideration of attributes for vertices/edges).


## Ideas


### Using graph metrics or motifs to predict load shedding

There clearly is a correlation between power-system-based measures of network health such as total load shed and graph metrics (e.g., number of components in the graph, which corresponds to islanding of the power system). How can we create statistical or machine-learning models to predict the amount of load shed, just using graph metrics or motif counts?


### Motif distribution as a function of level sets on graph attributes

The simplest example of this is to treat the power-system graph with just edge weights:

*   Each vertex corresponds to bus in the power system and we ignore whether there is load or generation at the bus.
*   Each edge corresponds to a branch in the power system, and we set the weight of the edge equal to the *residual capacity* (defined as the capacity minus the current value of the flow on the branch).

Now consider level sets for some residual capacity level $\alpha$.  Let's call these *level graphs* since they are level sets living on graphs.  The upper (lower) level graph is the subgraph only containing edges whose weight is greater than (less than) $\alpha$. For example, a high level $\alpha$ will produce an upper level graph containing only the edges with high residual capacity.

Compute the motif distributions for the upper and lower level graphs as function of $\alpha$. Intuitively, the motif distribution for upper level graphs corresponds to motifs made up of the "strongest" (highest residual capacity) edges and the motif distribution for lower level graphs corresponds to motifs made up of the weakest edges. We hypothesize that these motif distributions relate correlate to the robustness of the power system. These motif distributions change as a network degrades or repairs, and may be correlated with global measures of power-system health such as the total load shed.


## Example data from power-system simulations

The example results files are on eagle.hpc.nrel.gov in the directory /projects/siip/tda-ps/contingency-datasets/shedding/. Abstracts of these are available in [../contingency-datasets/](../contingency-datasets/).

*   The `_summary.tsv` files have one row for each contingency case and provides summary statistics such as amount of load shed.
*   The `_load.tsv` files show how much load was shed at each network location.
*   The `_branch.tsv` files show which branches were taken out of service during the contingency. Note that there seems to be an issue with loads being erroneously rounded off to the nearest integer.

We've decided to test algorithms on the NESTA 30 IEEE case and then later apply them to the larger cases.
